---
layout: post
title: Docker 101
---
*Disclaimer: This is not an in-depth introduction to Docker and only aims at pointing out its utility and ease of use*. 

*Although not necessary to follow along, the contents of the examples run have been made available in a [repository in Github.](https://github.com/iamhectorotero/docker-articles)*

In this article I'll talk about connecting Docker container with the Internet. I'll
go through an example that's rich enough to understand the concept but not really
hard to follow. To be specific, we'll be building an API with a database service
running on background and we will be running some tests on it.

## Dockerized Flask API

For our first part, we'll use only two files: the code for the Flask API (api.py) 
and the Dockerfile that will generate the container the API will run in.
The contents of the files can be seen below:

```python
#api.py
from flask import Flask

app = Flask(__name__)

@app.route("/")
def hello():
    return "Hello World!"

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host="0.0.0.0", port=5000)
```

```dockerfile
#Dockerfile
FROM python:3.5.3

RUN pip install flask

COPY api.py /app/

WORKDIR /app

CMD python api.py
```

Our api.py defines one endpoint only and runs the API on the port 5000. The
Dockerfile installs flasks, copies and runs the api.py in the container.
If we build our image and run it:
```shell
docker build . -t api:1.0
docker run api:1.0
```
this will run our API inside of the container in the port 5000, but we won't be
able to reach it (actually we could, but we'll see that later). In order to do
so, we need to map ports in our local host to the ones in our container. We don't
need to rebuild our image, it's enough to specify it like so:
```shell
docker run -p 8080:5000
```
this will map the port 8080 in the localhost to the 5000 in the container. With this,
we should be able to navigate to *localhost:8080* and succesfully connect to the API.

## Adding a database service 

We can easily add a database service. I've chosen MongoDB, but any other should be as 
easy to add. I have modified the api.py and API's Dockerfile lightly as follows:

```python
#api.py
from flask import Flask, request
from pymomngo import MongoClient

dummy_number = 0
app = Flask(__name__)
cl = MongoClient("db:27017"")
db = cl["test"]

@app.route("/", methods=["GET", "POST"])
def insert_dummy():
    if request.method == "POST":
        db.coll.insert_one({"number": dummy_number})
        dummy_number += 1
        return "Post succeded"

    elif request.method == "GET":
        return db.coll.find({})

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host="0.0.0.0", port=5000)
```

```dockerfile
#Dockerfile
FROM python:3.5.3

RUN pip install flask pymongo

COPY api.py /app/

WORKDIR /app

CMD python api.py
```

We've included a POST method to our endpoint that will insert a record in the 
mongo collection we create in the first lines of the file. To use pymongo we need
to have a mongo instance running (we will connect to a service in port 27017).
There's a mongo image available in Dockerhub that we will use for creating this
instance. For containers to communicate with one another, they have to be in the 
be part of the same network (legacy methods work differently, more on this later).
We can create a new network named my-api-network, by typing: 
```bash
docker network create my-api-network
```

After doing this, we have to run the docker containers normally but specifying the 
network parameter and giving the container a name so that we can communicate with
it from the other container. 

```bash
docker run -d --net my-api-network --name db mongo:3.4.7 

docker build . -t api
docker run --net my-api-network -p 8080:5000 api
```

Once we've done this we should be able to query the API which will be running in 
http://localhost:8080. 

Let's review what we've done:
- First, we run the mongo:3.4.7 image, specifying that it will belong to the created
network. We also give it a name, *db*, for ease of access. This means that inside of
my-api-network in the host named *db* in its 27017 port we have an instance of mongo
running.

- After this, we build again the image for our API docker and run it in the same network,
this time publishing the service in the port 8080 of our host. When we run this docker,
the *api.py* file will look for a database in the URI specified in our MongoClient constructor 
(line 6).

### Some important remarks

- There can only be one container (running or stopped) with the same name. This is, if 
we try to run the last commands a second time, it will detect a conflict when running
the MongoClient, as there's already an existing one called *db*. In order to remove the
previous container we can do:
```bash
docker rm db
```
- We only have to publish those ports that will map to outside the *my-api-network*. In
other words, we don't need to publish ports involved in communications inside of the
created network.

- For some API testing, we can use *curl* to reach the API with a GET or a POST:
```bash
#For a POST example, we specify the --data parameter
curl --data "foo bar" localhost:8080
#For a GET example, we don't specify anything
curl localhost:8080
```
## Adding some tests

In an real-life example of an API, we may want to add some tests this can be easily
included with a third docker container as follows. 










